Ken Burns has been telling stories of
America for nearly 50 years, becoming
well known in that time for epic
historical documentaries. From the
American Civil War, which was a landmark
TV moment back in 1990 all the way to
today and always working with PBS,
American Public Broadcasting. For the
last 10 years, he's worked on a project
about the American Revolution. Another
huge topic and a series that's being
released just as history feels
particularly contentious. So, for our
Thanksgiving episode, here's filmmaker
Ken Burns talking to me for the Michelle
Hussein Show.
>> Ken Burns, welcome. Thank you.
>> I'm conscious that we are speaking as
Americans gather for Thanksgiving and
some are probably thinking about the
stories of the early settlers and the
story that you have immersed yourself in
for the last 10 years is the story of
the revolution. You will have already
known a lot about American history
before you began. So what surprised you
the most? But I had no idea of the
complexity, the variety of individuals,
the sense that it was a a bloody civil
war in ways that our civil war is merely
a sectional war. U that it's a world
war, a global war, maybe the fifth
global war for the prize of North
America. that it has the big ideas and
all the famous for Americans uh founding
fathers, the bold-faced names if you
will, but also hundreds of other people
that are engaged in it, who are
important and give dynamics and
dimension and complexity to the story.
And that's all we want from our stories.
We don't want a superficial Madison
Avenue sanitized version of our past. We
want a complete one. Everyone wants
that. It doesn't matter about politics.
you just you you want dramatic uh
stories. I mean, Shakespeare is
complicated. Um, we have a sign, a neon
sign in our editing room that says in
lowercase cursives, it's complicated
because in my business, the art has to
be subservient to the facts. And when
you learn new facts, and sometimes
they're contradictory, you have to find
a way that your narrative can tolerate
them and understand them. And
unfortunately, we live in a media world
where everything's a one or a zero. And
we live in a political world and where
everything is one way or the other. It's
a binary that does not exist but is
artificially created for the simplicity,
the laziness, the cynicism of what's
going on. But telling a complex story
escapes the specific gravity of cynicism
and and offers something in return,
something rich and something where you
can say that the sum of the parts um the
whole is greater than the sum of the
parts. That's the one in one equaling
three. That's the That's the equation
that animates my entire professional
life.
>> And the series is out now in all its
complexity. But you will have known as
you did it that it's a more fractious
time in America compared to the end of
the Obama presidency when you start out.
And indeed, in an executive order, the
White House said earlier this year that
they were against telling history in a
way that casts the founding principles
in a negative light.
>> Well, I certainly haven't done that.
I've put them in a very, very positive
light. I've just put them in the correct
light, which is the engagement of all
the characters. you can um it is
possible, I assume, to make this a a one
act, one room play where it all takes
place in in in Philadelphia, but it
doesn't give you the dynamism. It
doesn't understand the the the underdog
story that this is. I mean, on on April
19th, 1775, when British troops open up
on American militia on Lexington Green
in Massachusetts, the chances of their
success is zero. and and six and a half
long years later at Yorktown that
British army is surrendering and how
that happens is 40 battles un enormous
social and political even religious
change within the colonies. So you have
this complex dynamic of the 500,000
people out of the three million who are
free or enslaved Africans. You have
Native Americans either coexisting,
assimilated uh with the colonists and
then those nations that are as distinct
and as important as say a France or a
Prussia is on the world scene.
>> Yeah. And one of the many things that
really interested and intrigued me about
this series is realizing that this
revolutionary spirit on the part of the
colonies, how their ideas were
influenced by the Native American
nations, that Native American nations
had what we would recognize today as a
union in a way that the 13 colonies
really didn't until quite late. It's
it's really remarkable and we actually
center this story as you know uh at the
very very beginning of the film there is
a group of of six native nations first
five and then six uh the which is often
called the Iricquay confederacy they
called it the Hodenon it permitted each
of those nations to sort of retain their
identity it's sort of like the European
Union and at the same time could
economically and diplomatically and
militarily have a union and Benj
Benjamin Franklin sees this 20 years
before the revolution and says, "I want
that. That's what we need." From New
Hampshire to Georgia, the 13 colonies.
We need that. And he gets people to sign
up for his plan of union in Albany 20
years before the revolution 17 uh 54.
And then they go home to try to sell it
and nobody wants to give up any
autonomy. So the plan dies, but it gets
resurrected as the revolution begins to
become a shooting war. And it's very
interesting. It's also, I have to say,
the Enlightenment, and the Americans are
reading. They're very literate, in some
ways, percentage- wise, more literate
than the British population. They're
freer. They own land in ways that
ordinary folks in in Britain do not own
land. They pay less taxes. They've got
great health. Their literacy is second
only to Scandinavia. And they're reading
Modscu. They're reading the French
philosophers of the Enlightenment.
they're reading uh lock and Hume and the
Scottish Enlightenment philosophers. And
so when you marry this idea of a
practical example sitting at your
western doorstep of the possibility of
union and you merge it with these
arguments you're having with your own
countrymen that suddenly get blown out
into universal rights. Yikes. And
they're very powerful. The word liberty
means something to everybody. It means
something to George Washington who owns
hundreds of human beings and Thomas
Jefferson who owns hundreds of human
beings. But it also means something to
those hundreds of human beings. And it
means something to women who are a
majority of the population. And it means
something to Native Americans. It means
something all across the board. And that
animating spirit makes the American
Revolution not just this important
origin story for the United States. It
makes it one of the most important
events in all of world history because
that revolution is going to spawn 200
years of revolutions all around the
globe. It has a kind of force and a
power that is going to destroy the
French monarchy. It's going to change
Europe. It's going to change Latin and
South America and then later Asia and
and Africa. And it comes from the idea
of this, you know, anticolonial movement
that, strange to say in this day and
age, the United States invented.
And yet when that anti-colonial
movement is ultimately successful
in 1776 and then finally against the
British a few years later, what it
results in is the westward expansion
which dispossesses Native Americans of
their land and and those
African-Americans who were runaway
slaves are hunted down. And George
Washington, the great hero, if there is
one, although they're many of your
story, is keeping those runaway slaves
imprisoned so that their slaves so that
their owners can come back and get them.
>> This is the story of human beings. The
contradictions, the hypocrisies, all of
that is there. We don't have a country
without George Washington, but yes, he
owns other human beings. He wants those
uh uh escaped uh enslaved people to be
returned to their owners. Um, look, they
do not call, they don't send their
delegates uh to Philadelphia before the
revolution uh to the eastern seabboard
uh Congress. They don't send they don't
make George Washington the head of the
eastern seabboard um uh army. They make
him the head of the Continental Army,
which is directed by the Continental
Congress. They know where they're going.
So, first of all, the irony that
settlers dumping the tea, colonists
dumping the tea in Boston Harbor are
crudely dressed as Native Americans,
every school kid in America knows that.
And then when you ask them why, they
say, "Oh, to put the blame on the Native
Americans." That's not the reason. It's
this attempt so ironic and so
bittersweet that it and so complicated,
so moving in a way. They're trying to
tell Britain, "We're not of you. We're
not of the mother country anymore. were
Aboriginal like the people we've spent
the last 150 years dispossessing of
their land so that we can have these 13
colonies and the people that were going
to spend the next 150 years getting rid
of all the rest of the land all the way
to the Pacific. So there's
>> don't you struggle with the well don't
you struggle with that hypocrisy? No,
this is what what do you mean the story?
There's a wonderful moment when the um
great scholar Annette Gordon Reed, who
is a black woman, says, you know, that
found that slavery bound Thomas
Jefferson's life from beginning to end.
We're in the middle of a section on the
Declaration of Independence where he is
declaring that all men are created
equal. We hold these truths to be
self-evident. He says they're not
self-evident. These are brand new in the
world that all men are created equal.
And she says, "And he knows slavery is
wrong. George Washington knows slavery
is wrong." And she said, 'Well, how
could you do something if you knew it
was wrong? She said, 'Th that's the
human question for all of us. She's not
taking Thomas Jefferson off the hook or
by extension George Washington off the
hook. She's putting us on the hook for
our tiss presantism about how we're so
different. It's it we're all
complicated. This is what your William
Shakespeare has given us in in so many
ways. What's going on? The
contradictions. Here's the good news,
though. Those words, when Thomas
Jefferson meant them, he meant all men
of property free of debt who were white.
We don't mean that anymore. And everyone
who heard those words began to argue for
something that changed the world. Now,
the second he says the word all,
slaveryy's over. Now, it will take four
score and nine years before that
happens. uh women will have to wait an
just an excruciatingly,
you know, impossibly long 144 years in
our country for to to receive suffrage.
But those walls are broken down. They're
done. They're over. And you could you
could extend it to all other kinds of
things, child labor, gay marriage,
whatever it might be. This this has has
>> So they start something by saying by
saying the words all they start even
though they're not prepared to deliver
it themselves. The late historian who
Bernard Balin who died at 101, God bless
him, and we interviewed him when he was
98 or 99 says nobody talked about
slavery as an evil before the the
revolution. There were people who who
spoke to its evil, but it was not part
of the common uh conversation. The
second the revolution started and for
every moment through to our civil war,
it was the number one topic in America.
So by bringing up what you're calling
the hypocrisy of these natural rights by
people who owned other human beings just
cuz Jefferson didn't see the hypocrisy.
I mean he did see the hypocrisy. He just
couldn't act on it. There's too much
money to be made in slavery. And may I
point out that the British Empire's
wealth it's it's its profit centers are
in the Caribbean. Only South Carolina is
profitable. We're just the most populous
and we also are the most literate and we
tra we make things and so we're great
trading partners with Britain before the
revolution. But the 13 colonies in the
Caribbean like Jamaica and Barbados
which are 90% enslaved people that's
where the engine of wealth for the
British Empire comes from. And so when
we deal with hypocrisy it's kind of like
like saying oxygen. This is like human
behaviors. I mean there would not be a
William Shakespeare if there was not
hypocrisy and irony and contradiction
and undertoe not between people but
within individuals. So you can see that
in Washington, you can see that in
Jefferson, you can see that in many of
the founding fathers, though the Adamses
were vehemently opposed to slavery and
and uh John Adams's wife uh Abigail, who
may be the best writer of the whole lot,
um is is from the very get-go just
totally uncomfortable with the idea that
we're going to be talking about liberty
and we can't we can't uh rid ourselves
of this horrific hypocrisy right in our
own midst. Yeah, Ken, I hear you on the
universality of hypocrisy. My family are
from India and Pakistan and the impact
of the revolution on the British as far
as India was concerned is that no way
are we going to lose India. You know,
look look at what the Americans did to
us. We're not going to have the same
thing happen again. I can I put can I
tell you what my connection is to
Lexington Green and to 1775?
>> Yes, please. Do you have one? I do have
one which I had no idea about until I
was on a TV ancestry program and they
traced back that my you know six
generations back one of my forefathers
Michael Farley was the head of the
Massachusetts militia his four sons were
all soldiers of the revolution one of
them killed and essentially the link to
me is that one of the grandsons ends up
in India so goes off by 1820 to seek his
fortune because maybe the prosperity of
the of American America isn't quite
enough for him at that point. But it
gives me this connection to exactly the
period that you're talking about. And I
have to reconcile myself to the fact
that when they were fighting for their
liberty, they didn't mean everyone's
liberty.
>> At an ancestry show, I learned that I
have a you know, my mother's side a
slave person. It was a household one one
person. Um and I I took that with
equinimity. The thing that really
bothered me was that I have an ancestor
also on my mother's side in
Massachusetts named Eldad Tupper who
move had to move to New Brunswick
because he refused to sign a loyalty
oath after the revolution and had been a
loyalist throughout that. I do have one
saving grace perhaps for uh those of you
in the UK that I am also uh that same
trustee so uh has me related to Robert
Burns the national poet of of Scotland
who still says in in his poem to allow
one of my favorite lines in the English
language oh with some power the gift to
give us to see ourselves as others see
us and that becomes an animating part of
how we tell stories not sort of um
imprisoned by the binary that we've been
talking about, but tolerant of or just
aware of all of these contradictions and
undertoe, which makes drama more
interesting and makes us able to deal
with one another. If if if it's if it's
that binary, you can't be married. If
it's that binary, you can't run a raise
a child. But somehow we've permitted our
politics to descend to this, you know,
abysmal level of of one thing or the
other that that actually frankly doesn't
exist in nature.
>> Can I understand a bit more, Ken, about
your own nature and the story of how you
came to do this work that you have over
decades now. You started with the
Brooklyn Bridge documentary and the
Civil War, of course, was a an an
amazing American TV moment. One of our
producers was nine when it came out and
she remembers everyone sitting and
watching it. So, how did that work
began? What was it in your early life
that led you to it?
>> Uh, you know, as many things for many
people, the thing that has been the most
significant for my growth has had to do
with loss. My mother had cancer began
when I was two or three. She died when I
was 11, just a couple months short of my
12th birthday. I remember sometime after
my 12th birthday, I saw my father
looking at an old movie and crying. And
I'd never seen my dad cry. Not not when
my mother was sick and not when um not
when she died or not at the impossibly
sad funeral. And it was a the film was
uh Sir Carol Reed's Odd Man Out about
the Irish troubles starring James Mason.
It's a beautiful film still still works
today. And I realized that film had
given him a safe haven that nowhere else
in his life could he express these
emotions. And I was sitting there late
at night with him. It was a school
night. He was letting me stay up. And he
cried. And I just went at that moment. I
want to be a filmmaker. And later on in
life, my late father-in-law, who was an
eminent psychologist, I said, you know,
I could never be aware of the date that
my mother died, April 28th. It'd always
be approaching and then,
you know, receding, but I was never
present. He said, "I bet you blew out
your candles on your birthday cake
wishing she'd come back." And I said,
"How'd you know?" Told me two or three
other intensely personal things. He
said, "Look what you do for a living.
You wake the dead. You make Abraham
Lincoln and Jackie Robinson come alive.
Who do you think you're really trying to
wake up?" But I then I was then by then
39 or 40. I began to really work to
understand what it was that I had not
dealt with as a as a little boy with
this tremendous loss. And it it enriched
my work even more. Uh so but it but it's
born in tragedy. It's born in loss. Um
my mother's gift in a funny perverse way
was dying. I don't want her to be gone.
There's not a day that I don't think of
her. Um my oldest daughter named her
first child after her, my first
grandchild. And it is a poignant and
positive response in the middle of a lot
of draped blackurial
crepe that has attended my life like the
Spanish moss and the live oaks in the
south. Um but it's born of loss and I
and I it's interesting.
>> Your mother's been gone 60 years I
think.
>> 60 and a half. It's way too long. I will
tell you that it is way too long. I talk
about this with my brother. You know
it's funny. My dad died much later. He
had moved from daddy to dad. She never
left mommy. So you have two 70-year-old
70 men in their 70s who refer to their
mother as mommy. And we talk about that,
you know, every time we talk. We just
say mommy and it just is what it is. She
left at a time when he was um he was uh
10 and I was um 11.
>> Do you think you're still grieving?
>> The halflife of grief is endless. I I I
think that's true. the style that you
have made your trademark, Ken, the use
of paintings, fragments of letters,
photographs with your more recent work
where you zoom in and you're panning
across, you're using music, you're using
sound effects. How much of that was born
of necessity in that let's take the
Civil War documentary, you didn't have a
lot of great visuals to work with? Well,
we had a lot of photographs and that's
where the American Revolution has at an
even greater deficit because photographs
are real. You show a picture of Abraham
Lincoln with his general at Antidum and
you just know what's going on. But you
don't have that. The variety of
portraits of Washington are wildly
varied. Some look cartoonish, some don't
look at all like him. Some do look like
him. Um, and so you have to figure out a
way in this case to make them come
alive. It's it's the filmmaker's
problem. like you have to have a complex
sound effects track. In this case, in
addition to a third person narrator I
have been pioneering since the first
film on Brooklyn Bridge, First Person
Boys is read by the finest actors in the
world. And I would submit that the cast
list for this film is better than any
film or television series that's ever
happened. I think that Sir Kenneth
Branow could have read [clears throat]
every single part except the female
parts. And maybe I I'm I'm selling him
short, but also Tom Hanks and Meryill
Streep and Paul Jamati and Laura Lenny
and Claire Danes and I I' I've probably
listed a fifth of of the voices that
make this guy. Jeff Daniels, Josh
Brolan, um
>> Brolin is the voice of Washington,
right? And I I wonder just let us into
how you direct them because I think that
you are
>> you you are very specific on how you
want these people to sound. So, how do
you know that that's how Washington
>> I don't know. I don't know. Sometimes
it's hard. Uh, and uh, Washington was
particularly hard. In fact, the only
non-American film I've made is one on
Leonardo da Vinci and uh, last year I
was at the Rome Film Festival premiering
that film and I was flying back home and
Dune 2 was playing and I was falling
asleep and nodding out, but at one point
I just sat up straight because I heard
Josh's voice. in both the Dune films and
I just said okay let's give this a try.
I said, "Look, you know, as everybody
I've told everybody this, you don't have
to project. This is not the theater.
It's almost like the way if you're
reading to your kids or your grandkids,
you actually lower your voice, which
brings people closer." And so I said,
"You need to just inhabit the words."
And in the case of George Washington,
you have an impossible task. This is an
opaque and unknowable person by design.
He kept that rectitude so firmly there.
But there are there is in the writing
little glimpses. So, I need you to be
both opaque, but give me the little bits
where you feel the emotion, you feel the
passion. And he did it fantastically. I
told Tim Hanks, you know, I'd make you
Tom, I'd make you George Washington in a
second. He said, but then everybody
would be saying, "Oh, Tom Hanks is
George Washington." I said, "Right." So,
I gave him 14 different voices and every
14 is in the film. He is such a good
reader that he actually slips in and
hides with perfection behind the eight
or 10 people that he plays in these 14
quotes. And I just have to tell you that
when you record voices with people, not
all of them get in, right? You in
editing, you whittle them down, but
everyone that he read is in. And he's
I've worked with him now it's close to
25 years. and he is so talented and so
generous that if you wanted somebody to
read the back of your serial box or the
phone book, uh, you know, he he'd be the
guy to do it.
>> What what you're saying about Tom Hanks
does explain to me why I knew he was in
the series and I watched the
[clears throat] episodes I was like,
which one is is Tom? Because I recognize
his
>> exactly. So, I'm going to I'll tell him
I'll tell him that because this is
exactly what I I love and I I know that
he loves too.
>> You did bring in one new thing in this
series you hadn't done before, Ken. And
that's the [clears throat] reenactments.
There's a lot of reenactments. Why is it
because in the Tik Tok generation you do
visual
>> device? I I have no photographs. I have
no news reels. We spent more than five
years filming reenactment groups in
French and British and militia and
continental and Native American, black
troops, whatever, women, children that
are always there on the battlefield. And
we um collected a critical mass of them
so that we could use them as if we'd
gone to the National Archives to pick up
the photographs of that. We we treated
them in a very impressionistic way. We
filmed them at every time of day and
night, usually at dawn or dusk. We don't
see faces. We see silhouettes. We see
cannon firing. And all of that means
that we're not asking them to reenact a
specific battle. We're asking them to
participate and to give a sense. And if
you add complex, in some cases 150
different soundtracks along with the
music, the third person narrator read by
Peter Coyote, and then some of the
voices that you and I have been talking
about, then you get a sense that you're
there, and there's a coldness that you
can feel in the winter scenes. There's a
a hotness you can feel in the summer
scenes when when 20 British soldiers
were dying in the march across New
Jersey every day just of heat. Um it's
it's just uh the live cinematography is
the is is the key to this as our maps.
Some of them just leaving the old maps
alone. They're beautiful works of art.
Some adding arrows, some extruding them
and making them dimensional. So there,
you know, there's lots of ways to bring
to life to wake the dead as my late
father said.
>> Now I'm going to read the words that you
put right at the end of the series and
forgive me because clearly I'm not
Merryill Strea Linny or Cla Danes or any
of the amazing voices that you had in.
But these are such striking lines.
Benjamin Rush in 1787 saying the
American war is over. But this is far
from being the case with the American
Revolution. On the contrary, nothing but
the first act of the great drama is
closed. It remains yet to establish and
perfect our new forms of government.
Patriots come forward. Your country
demands your services. Hear her
proclaiming in size and groans in her
governments, in her finances, in her
trade, in her manufacturers, in her
morals, and in her manners. The
revolution is not over. I mean, I'm
feeling emotional reading these words.
>> I am emotional. Ed, Ed Ed Norton, the
great actor, reads that as he does many
characters in the film.
>> But Ken, are you saying the revolution
is not over today?
>> Yes. In all of the spirit that moved you
in that moment, this there's something
interesting. We we sometimes focus on
the word pursuit of the phrase pursuit
of happiness and and argue about
happiness means the right to make as
much money as I want. This is what
worried the founding fathers. They
thought the pursuit of happiness was
lifelong learning. But the key word here
is pursuit. This is a process story. The
declaration has it. We're in pursuit of
happiness. Um the Constitution 11 years
later has it. A more perfect union.
We're a nation in the process of
becoming. So everyone knew that these
were original documents. the
constitution that would immediately
would not be ratified if it wasn't
immediately amended by some things some
basic rights that all of the people who
fought for it wanted to have and that we
would continue to be tinkering with this
machine to perfect it. So
that meant in 1789 when the United
States government actually took the
Constitution of two years before and put
it in action, it meant all white men,
you know, could vote, right, who were 21
years old. We don't mean that now. And
so the story of the American adventure,
which Benjamin Rush understood right
away, he's saying this is an open-ended
thing. We are perfectable. And that is a
key thing. More often than not, people
say, "This is it." And just as the
Bible, the Old Testament says in
Ecclesiastes, there's nothing new under
the sun. Most human beings believe that
nothing would ever change. There are
people from Wales and England and
Scotland and Ireland who have worked
dependent land as you for a hundred a
thousand years. their f whole families
have worked it for somebody else and
they've come here and they now own a
plot of land maybe taken from Native
Americans but they own it and they feel
this sense of the possibility of things
actually changing and I think what is in
some ways one of the biggest takeaways
is the perfectability of human beings
the improvement and in fact that's the
beauty of Benjamin Rush's statements it
doesn't mean you have to kill people
every 20 years. You know, Jefferson
famously said many years later that the
tree of liberty should be uh watered
with the blood of tyrants and patriots
every 20 years. And you kind of go, no,
you don't need to do the violence. This
is what human beings always do. It's the
fact
>> Yeah. I guess I'm asking are are there
aspects of what has happened this year
that you're struggling with?
>> No, I I I have to be disciplined that
that sign it's complicated. when I
began. Our our famous satist Mark Twain
says it's um history doesn't repeat
itself, which of course it doesn't. No
event has happened twice. But it rhymes,
which is the best thing I've ever heard
since Ecclesiastes. That there's nothing
new under the sun. What has been will be
again. What has been done will be done
again. There's nothing new under the
sun. Suggesting human nature doesn't
change. And it basically doesn't. But I
think what happens is you have to as a
filmmaker be disciplined. The rhymes
that were happening when we began this
project when Barack Obama was president
changed in the next year and the next
year and the next year. So they're
different rhymes and if you pay
attention to them you date your film.
But today is a school day in the United
States and hundreds of classrooms are
looking at my 35-year-old film on the
Civil War, that Lewis and Clark film
that we made, the film on the
Roosevelts, on World War II, on jazz, on
baseball, and and on our recent film on
the US and the Holocaust, and many
others because they're evergreen,
because we did not we did not succumb to
the desire to say, "Aha, isn't this so
much like today?"
>> But what about your next work? That's
what I wonder about because you've
always worked on uh with PBS
>> working on several things. Yeah,
>> PBS is we President Trump wants to end
federal funding for public broadcasting.
>> He did. He did. He killed the
corporation for He didn't the Congress
killed the corporation for public
broadcasting and it it was an incredibly
short-sighted thing. It will hurt rural
um stations more than us. It I took a
big hit. money that had already been
authorized and appropriated for future
projects that I'm working on and have
been working on for years has
disappeared. I'll have to fund raise.
PBS had to lay off a lot of people, but
they'll be around. They'll continue.
I'll continue. What I'm
>> Will you find Will you find other
sources of funding?
>> They will. I just work hard.
>> Where do you make that up from?
>> Just, you know, places, foundations,
individuals of wealth who have always
contributed. the the PBS uh the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting,
which was eliminated, was about 20% of
my budget, equal to our corporate
underwriter, but many other people will
fill the gap. I'm worried about the next
person coming up who's not going to be
able to be funded. I'm worried about
those rural stations. Sometimes the PBS
station, it's the largest network in the
country. There are 338 individual
stations. I'm worried about that's the
only signal they get and so they'll be a
news desert. nobody will be covering the
school board or the uh or the city
council uh meeting. Uh they won't be
have that emergency signal. So, it's
just it it was an unfortunate and
unnecessary sort of political gesture
and and maybe things will change and it
will be resurrected and I feel
optimistic that that you know in a
selfish way I I'll be able to to to go
on and and PBS will continue and it's
been the only place it could have put on
my films. could with my reputation go to
other places and get all the money I
need to do the revolution $30 million
plus but they wouldn't give me 10 years
to do it right they want it in a year
and a half and I don't make films that
are this complicated and this deep in
that amount of time I don't know how to
do it and I my hats are off to the
people who can but I think the reason I
occupy a position as I do in my country
is because I spend that time to do it
right that I don't put any of my
personal politics in it and that I speak
to everybody and there is in this film
something for everybody here. Not
because we're trying to be all things to
be all people but if you tell a good
story it would be like saying well
Shakespeare is only good for liberal
democrats
that's poppyccock right he can appeal he
appeals to this day because of the
truths he was able to get um to
everybody.
>> What stories are you telling next?
>> Well, we're working on a film. We have
been for several years on the history of
LBJ Lyndon Bain Johnson and the New
Deal. Um a sort of he his hero was FDR.
It's a very complicated thing. The
Vietnam War curtailed that. We're doing
a film on reconstruction which is the
most misunderstood period in American
history. That post-war period where the
North was attempting to rebuild the
South and integrate black Americans into
it and its collapse is the disaster.
However, Birth of a Nation and Gone with
the Wind suggest that the actual
reconstruction, the attempt at
equalization was the bad thing and that
in both of those films, the Kulux Clan,
which is our own homegrown al-Qaeda or
ISIS, were the heroes of that story and
when in fact they are the villains of
that story.
>> Ken, as you are our Thanksgiving
episode, can I ask you this Thanksgiving
weekend, what are you grateful for?
Well, you know, I'm grateful that I am
an American. I am incredibly patriotic,
as my children and my grandchildren will
tell you, probably with no small amount
of discomfort that every year before we
eat on the 4th of July, I make them
listen to me read the Declaration of
Independence. Uh, and I get each time I
get a little choked up as as you were
and I were listening to Benjamin Rush's
words. And now my kids will offer other
readings or I'll give it to my grandkids
are learning to read to to read
something else. I'm I'm I'm very very
grateful. Um uh and I think gratitude is
the missing ingredient uh in our our our
sort of degraded political lives these
days. Everything is as I said binary and
it's not. It's so complicated and and
yet I have a as history will do an
essential optimism. I'm grateful for the
fact that being a student of history
permits me to have a kind of sense that
that the human race will figure this
out. That the imbalances of the moment
and we're all so narcissistic. Our
moment is the worst. We're chicken
littles. The sky is falling. It's all
bad. That that I can point out in this
American Revolution, it's much more a
division back then. Um that it is a
civil war, that it is a global war. And
maybe by seeing their own reflection in
these historical figures, well-known or
not wellknown, gives you a a a chance to
realize that for the first time in human
history, people were no longer subjects
under authoritarian rule,
>> but citizens with all of the
responsibilities attended to that. And
it's been a on the whole with lots of
problems a positive in the course of
human events as Thomas Jefferson would
say. Ken Burns, thank you for taking us
into the past and talking about the
present as well. Happy Thanksgiving.
>> Happy Thanksgiving to you.